Sir, I rise to support the Finance Bill. The Finance Minister no doubt has laudable objectives. But unfortunately, the laudable objectives enunciated in the Budget speech are not reflected in the actual implementation of the Finance Bill. The country is baffled; the entire nation is confused as to how the Government has managed to mesmerise the country with laudable objectives but without the concerned provisions in the Finance Bill.

Dr. Manmohan Singh has been the Finance Minister for the last two Governments of one and a half years. But the fact remains that there is economic instability in the country. What actually took place was that the Budget was presented in August 1947 by late Shri Chettiar; the revenue receipts at that time were to the tune of Rs. 197 crores and the deficit was Rs. 27 crores. Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, as you know, the first Budget was for only six months but by the end of that financial year the Government came out successful and with a surplus. In the present Budget, the total expenditure of the Government is about Rs. 1,19,000 crores. The Prime Minister and Dr. Manmohan Singh, day in and day out, say that they are curtailing Government expenditure. But the figures go contrary to their assertion.

When the colonial rule ended in 1947, the entire Government of India was working only in the North Block and in the South Block. Now, the Government has expanded enormously. Their offices are accommodated in various buildings such as Krishi Bhavan, Yojana Bhavan, Shastri Bhavan, Nirman Bhavan and several others. Bharat Sarkar offices are at Lodhi Road also. Not only this, the Government has acquired even private houses and private buildings in Delhi to accommodate their offices. So, what do we find when we look at the figures in the expenditure Budget? What is the total expenditure of the Government on establishment and salaries? Sir, it is a fact that there are more than 43 lakh people working in the Government of India alone.

Their salary bill, establishment charges, emoluments and other allowances amount to nearly Rs. 13,000 crores. If the pension bill is also added, it amounts to nearly Rs. 16,000 crores. It is the Government of India alone; and when we take the State Governments, local bodies, aided institutions and the public sector undertakings, there are more than two crore people on their payrolls and the total expenditure involved in it is something around Rs. 45,000 crores. Little precious has been done to reduce the expenditure of the Government.

As for the figures of the non-Plan expenditure, when compared to last year’s Budget, the non-Plan expenditure went up by Rs. 4,400 crores. If we calculate, the Government of India spends something about Rs. 165 crores per day and Rs. 16,500 per second to run the show. This is on the expenditure side alone. And to meet this expenditure, the Government resorted to higher taxation and thereby the taxation has gone up and subsequently the revenue receipts went up. The revenue receipts account for Rs. 76,000 crores roughly.

Not satisfied with this, the Government goes in for borrowings—borrowing money both internally and externally. The total debt burden of the Government of India is roughly about Rs. 4,00,000 crores. The debt servicing, that is the interest payment alone, amounts to Rs. 32,000 crores per annum. So, the per capita debt in India is Rs. 4,200. And if we add this figure to the debt of the State Governments, the per capita debt goes up to Rs. 6,000 or Rs. 7,000 varying from one State to another. Even then the Government is not able to meet their expenses as they are living beyond their means. So, on one side they are enhancing taxation and on the other side they are going for borrowings.

As the money is still not sufficient, the Government has resorted to deficit financing. Day in and day out, Dr. Manmohan Singh says that they are curtailing deficit financing. But the figures supplied by the Finance Minister show that the deficit financing is to the tune of Rs. 5,000 crores. But the fiscal deficit is more than Rs. 34,000 crores.

So, deficit financing means printing additional notes from the Nasik Press. Whenever any individual issues a cheque without having the requisite balance in his account, the cheque is dishonoured. But the Government goes on printing notes without any legal sanction.