Mr. Vice-Chairman, in connection with this controversy, I may mention that I am one of those persons who feel that the present context of conditions in the country is not suitable for the purpose of discussing a Constitution (Amendment) Bill, which should be given necessary thought in a very calm atmosphere, and the democratic norms, which are held very high in our mind, should be the guiding principles.

At the present moment, when the very democratic ideals are being attacked and obstructed from outside, it may perhaps be not possible to consider these matters in a very detached and calm atmosphere. For that purpose, I should have liked if this Bill had been postponed or withdrawn from discussion.

Sir, under Article 53 of the Constitution, the President is the executive head of the State, and under Article 74 the Prime Minister is appointed by the President, and the Council of Ministers is appointed on the advice of the Prime Minister. In defining the relationship between the President and the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers, the words used are, “to aid and advise”.

I have been of the opinion, having read some of the commentaries about the British Constitution, that the position occupied by the President or the British Monarch is more or less the same. It has been the opinion expressed by various jurists not only in this country but outside also. If I had not listened to the speeches, I could have, without the least hesitation, said that probably the amendment was uncalled for.

But having listened to these two speeches, irrespective of the merits to be considered, there seems to be some controversy or at least some difference of opinion in interpreting a particular statute.

It has been even told that once a statute is passed by Parliament or a Legislature and it is placed in the hands of the lawyers who are to interpret it before courts, the intention of the statute, the purpose with which it is passed, is completely forgotten, and in relation to interpretation you find something else interpreted and decided by the courts, other than what has been sought to be passed by Parliament or a Legislature.

Being a clever lawyer, he has given an interpretation in relation to the prerogative of the President or the Head of the State and the powers that would exist in relation to the President.

Therefore, the concept is divided into prerogatives on the one side and the powers on the other side. When once we take into consideration the question of prerogatives, the prerogatives are not defined under the Constitution. The prerogatives come into existence only under a convention but not under the Constitutional powers that have been so far defined.

As far as the Constitutional power is concerned, I am one of those, Sir, who believe that as far as the Articles of the Constitution and their interpretations are concerned, the position of the President of India cannot be other than the position of the British Monarch in England. Therefore, the opinion of the Council of Ministers is binding on the President as it is binding on the Monarch of England.

Certain very concrete illustrations have been cited by a number of speakers who have spoken on the subject. Suppose, after the general elections Parliament assembles, then the President is to call somebody from the parties to form the Government. In clear cases where a Party has got absolute majority, probably it leaves no doubt.

But in cases where sometimes the Parties are so delicately balanced that the President is not in a position to make out which Party has the majority, there would always be Members going from one side to the other, changing the fortunes of the Party to which they belong. In such cases, what is the role of the President? Is the President to call somebody within his discretion or leave the matter to Parliament itself?

The convention so far known to the Constitutional democracy is that the President or the Governor, by his own subjective opinion on objective considerations, if he came to an opinion that a particular Party had majority, used to call the Leader of that Party and ask him to form the Government subject to approval by Parliament later on. If the Party has a majority, the Government would go on, otherwise the Government would fall.

Again, they have raised certain questions about Emergency, when there is what is called Constitutional vacuum in relation to the executive, whether in such cases the President is to act or not. All these, no doubt, are highly debatable points. But normally speaking, as far as the interpretation of the Constitution is concerned, it is one of the attributes of law that there must be a certainty in interpretation.

Mr. Bhupesh Gupta has raised the question of certainty of interpretation, and I am one with him. Any matter relating to interpretation of law should be referred to the Supreme Court and its ruling should be taken as the correct interpretation.