Madam, there is a strong feeling among the members and they pay a tribute to the Joint Select Committee whose report is very instructive and contains dissenting opinions which I consider very valuable.

But I have to make some observations because this Bill raises vital issues of Constitutional importance. This Bill has created doubts in the public mind about the advisability of some of its provisions and I feel that I owe it to the rule of law and to the profession to which I belong and which I have served for more than 45 years and to this Parliament that I should freely and frankly express my views and the doubts raised in the public mind so that the Government may be in a position to remove those doubts.

Madam, there is first the question of the determination of the age of Supreme Court Judges. So far no Supreme Court Judge has raised any dispute about his age and I have got a genuine belief that there shall never be a dispute with regard to the age of any Supreme Court Judge.

I feel that when future appointments are made, the Government will take ample care to have sufficient proof of age. If they care, they can put down the age in the warrant of appointment, or they can have a declaration or even an agreement. The question then is, why put an unnecessary provision in this Constitutional amendment?

We know that our Constitution has been the subject of study throughout the world among the jurists and international organisations and they will get the impression that after so many years of Independence, some questions have been raised about the age of the Judges which required Constitutional amendment. That will cast a reflection upon the dignity of the judiciary.

If we find that there is only just a stray case or two in which the question of the age of the Judge is involved, will it then be necessary to amend the Constitution? When there is no case about a Supreme Court Judge and no circumstance has arisen which calls for an amendment of the Constitution, we must not do anything against public feeling which may even remotely cast a reflection upon the dignity of our Judges.

The provision regarding the determination of the age of High Court Judges is important and I believe that it deserves very careful consideration.

The provision in this Bill is that the President shall decide in consultation with the Chief Justice. The Judge in the dispute between the executive and a Judge will be the head of the State, will be the head of the executive and the Chief Justice comes in as a consultant.

Now, this question of age is what we call a justiciable question. It is like the question of misbehaviour or the question of incapacity of a Judge. In other words, this is a question which will depend upon the determination of a dispute on an appraisement of evidence produced before the person deciding. Therefore, it is like a question of misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge.

Now, since the year 1700 in England there have been three principles recognised, which have not been departed from in any civilised country and, in particular, in any democracy and which assure the independence of the judiciary and it is acknowledged on all hands that the independence of the judiciary is an essential condition of democracy.

Now, this has been incorporated in our Constitution in Article 124 and if we bear in mind the Constitutional history of the appointment of Judges, we will find that in cases where Parliament is functioning, it is only after a judicial determination by Parliament on this question of misbehaviour or incapacity in the presence of the Judge that a formal order would be passed by the Head of the State.

Nowhere has the head of a State acted as a Judge in person. The Constitution has entrusted the question of the decision of disputes between a private party and the State to the judiciary and the question then arises whether this Bill has departed from this principle.

If this Bill has departed from this principle, then an inconsistency has been introduced and while in Article 124 the question of a justiciable issue or a dispute has been assigned to Parliament, the question of age, which stands on the same footing as a question of incapacity because it is a dispute with regard to the tenure, has been assigned to the executive.

Now, this is a matter which deserves serious consideration. This is what the public outside say. Since 1700 any dispute regarding the tenure of a Judge has never been decided by the executive. Shall we be the first to depart from that principle?

When we had no Parliament in this country, it was the Judges who decided a question between a Judge and the State. When Parliament came into existence, we adopted the principle of the British Constitution.