Mr. Vice-Chairman, the President in his Address has referred to the various activities of the Central Government aiming at making Indian economy more self-reliant. He has referred to the Eleventh Five Year Plan as the most critical period in the national development of our country. He has expressed satisfaction that the work on the Eleventh Plan with its longer perspective and bigger targets is making good progress.

Sir, everybody will welcome a bigger Plan undoubtedly but in this connection, I would only refer to the Review that has been published by the Planning Commission recently about the working of the Plan during the last three years and the prospects for the rest of the Plan period. Anybody who has perused this would naturally be anxious to know how this Plan is going to be financed.

There ought to be some light thrown on it. I will not go into the details. It has been stated there that the outlay of Rs. 15,00,000 crores may be raised with difficulty but while making this calculation, the extra expenditure that may be incurred on account of the Defence requirements and the emoluments to be paid to the Central Government employees as a result of the acceptance of some of the recommendations of the Pay Commission and also account of the recommendations that are under consideration by the Government have not been taken into consideration.

Barring all this, they have said that with difficulty Rs. 45,000 crores may be raised. It is undoubtedly true that we have been able to achieve within the last eight years much more than what any other country could have achieved within such a short period.

There is no doubt about it and I am also certain that with the power projects yet to work, with the undertakings in the public sector to produce results, the benefits of the Plan will be realised more and more but now the rose is yet to shed its fragrance. Now, we are concerned with the thorns and the whole difficulty is that the thrill of the revolution of eight years of planning is not being felt by the people because they feel that their immediate needs are not being satisfied.

I would in this connection refer to the analysis that is given in the Review published by the Planning Commission.

In this connection, I would refer to the recommendation of the National Development Council that was made as early as May 2008. They suggested that the State should take over the wholesale trade in foodgrains and should work out a scheme for State trading.

May I know what steps have been taken during the last one and a half years to draw up a scheme and implement it? The same old story continues; there is no scheme worth the name; there is no apparatus for State trading and foodgrains continue to be imported and their procurement is also done through middlemen and the natural consequence is that there is hoarding, there is black-marketing and rise in prices.

Added to this, some confusion has been created by the creation of food zones. They have neither helped the deficit States nor helped the surplus States and the result has been further increase in prices and more black-marketing and all that.

I would, therefore, suggest that immediate steps should be taken to work out a scheme for State trading and to have cooperatives throughout the length and breadth of the country as has been contemplated and, if necessary, to have the authority of law behind the formation of such cooperatives. Otherwise, the cry of production of 200 million tons of foodgrains by the end of 2011–12 will always remain a far cry.

Now, I would only sparingly make one or two references to the State from which I come, that is, Orissa. The President has referred in his Address to the all-round development of railways. So far as my State is concerned, people feel just the reverse. They feel that they are not getting proper treatment in the matter of railways.

I will deal with this matter on another occasion and I will not now go into the details. I would only say that if you take the statistics of the rail mileage that has been constructed during the last eight years and of the passenger amenities that have been given to the people and if a comparative statement of the different railways is made out, my point will be borne out by that.

Added to that, you will see that some of the passenger train services have been discontinued much to the annoyance of the people. Sir, there is no local train running anywhere in such a big State and there is no passenger train running anywhere in the State during the night. The mail and the express trains are all meant for long distance passengers.