Sir, the State Trading Corporation came into existence three years ago when the opinion in the country was very much divided. There were many doubting elements who shouted and cried that the State was embarking on an adventure which would be the close preserve of private enterprise.

All these people represented the world of vested interests, but the organisation was ushered in, in spite of their criticism, in a healthy climate of goodwill, because there were also many in the country who thought that such an organisation would be able to introduce a new healthy trend in our trade and commerce and that it would help us to build up our trade, international and national.

So, Sir, we have this organisation for the last three or four years and we have to look at and judge the career of this small baby which we have ushered into the economy of our country.

Sir, I have looked at all the three Reports produced by the Corporation and I was very much disappointed to find that the achievements of this organisation during this period have been pitifully small. It has belied our expectations. It has defeated our hopes and desires.

Sir, in the first year its performance was able to trade to the extent of Rs. 10 crores. In the second year, it has been increased to Rs. 28 crores. In the third year, which we are reviewing, the achievement has gone further and there is a turnover of Rs. 35 crores or so. These figures may signify a trend in the upward direction, a favourable trend, an expansionary growth of this organisation.

Sir, I think one of my friends on the opposite side pointed out that this organisation has been embarking upon fresh fields and new areas which should have been conveniently left in the hands of private people. May I draw his attention to the fact that with all this huge performance that it has to its credit, the organisation has been able to control less than 31 per cent of the trade and commerce in the country?

It has got on its list of trade only 43 items among countless items which are left for the private enterprise. My complaint is not that the organisation is taking up new fields and new areas and is encroaching upon the domain of private people and industrialists but that it has not been able to do sufficiently far so that it might play a very vital, significant and far-reaching part in building up the trade and commerce of this country.

Sir, the Report gives evidence of the fact that the organisation has been able to do certain good things which I really appreciate, good things which would otherwise have been neglected if they had been entrusted to private hands. For instance, the organisation has been able to utilise the neglected small ports. It has utilised these ports for the purpose of exporting mineral ores and other goods.

Again, Sir, the organisation has been able to bring about a certain amount of co-ordination between rail, road and canal transport and has also been able to exploit the unutilised capacities of the various modes of transport. Sir, this is all very good. We appreciate the small achievements, the small contributions the organisation has made in these directions.

But, Sir, may I point out that in the last three or four years in which the organisation has been functioning, it has not been able to work in such a way as to bring about an impact on the character and nature of the trade. It has also been functioning in a very unsystematic, unplanned and undisciplined way.

An organisation of this type should have had a programme, a plan of its own, a time-bound schedule. All the three Reports do not indicate anything of this kind. The organisation seems to have been making a choice of commodities in a very fitful and whimsical fashion, and the country does not know, and we do not know what commodities they are going to take up for the next year or two years.

They have not been able to draw up a list of priorities whereby they can function in a better, more methodical and systematic way.

Sir, my friend, the hon. mover of this motion, made out one point that there has been too much wastage and top-heavy administration. May I point out that this wastage, this extravagant or huge expenditure, is mainly due to the fact that this organisation is not able to do its job properly or has not given any thought to the drawing up of any programme to be kept in view either for the current year or for the subsequent years.

It is painful to all of us, who had a great hope in this organisation, that it has failed our expectations and has not proved our anticipations.