Sir, many farmers are not able to obtain the advantage of minimum support prices because procurement centres are sometimes at a considerable distance from their farms and villages. We intend to increase the number of procurement centres so that, eventually, every kisan will have access to a procurement centre within 10 kms of his village.

The rural roads network will also be strengthened in a phased manner. Kisanas, particularly those engaged in the farming of perishable farm commodities, are often denied a fair share of the value of their produce because of the very perishable nature of their produce.

The only answer lies in expanding cold storage facilities. To this end, a special programme is being instituted for the extension of institutional credit on attractive terms for the establishment of cold or cool storage facilities in rural areas. There is scope for substantially improving credit facilities to the farm community.

We propose four specific steps. First, we must rectify the problem of credit not being available to members of cooperatives because of the cooperatives to which they belong having become ineligible for NABARD refinance.

We have decided to open, with effect from the coming rabi season, a special line of credit of Rs. 100 crores through cooperative and commercial banks which will be earmarked exclusively for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe farmers.

Second, scales of finance for short-term production credit will be revised annually so that the credit made available to the farmer fully meets the recommended doses of inputs at current prices to make his cultivation remunerative.

Third, a special credit regime is being instituted for kisans in rain-fed farming areas covered by watershed development programmes. The new regime will operate on the basis of ensuring the availability of credit through a three to five year cycle so as to even out the inherent risks involved in good and bad monsoon years appearing in a cycle in such areas.

The special credit regime will take into account problems of overdues which arise within a cyclical period to ensure an adequate flow of credit in support of viable crop production and other allied activities. This regime will be reinforced by a major programme of watershed development in rain-fed farming areas.

The fourth step is essentially procedural which will immediately recognise as being of the utmost importance the requirements of small and marginal farmers.

The National Agricultural Credit Relief Fund will devise a comprehensive relief policy based on the special characteristics of production and the severity of damage in different agro-climatic zones. Through the rescheduling of loans and waivers of interest and principal in defined circumstances, the credit needs of farmers in different zones will be kept in view.

While we have invested astronomical sums of money in land improvement and irrigation, our management of land and water resources has been so poor as to render the benefits secured far below the optimum achievable.

We propose to take a number of steps to improve the management of our land and water resources. During the next five years, irrigation waters will be made available on an assured basis to an additional one crore hectares of land in the command areas of canal projects.

The authorities concerned will be held responsible for water reaching the farmers in assured quantities and at the right time. Also, 10 lakh tubewells and dugwells are to be constructed every year.

And five lakh hectares will be covered annually for the programme of desilting and maintenance of village tanks and ponds. Second, the productivity of unirrigated land is to be enhanced through effective watershed development and moisture conservation.

This programme will extend to 50 lakh hectares during the Tenth Plan. Third, 25 lakh hectares of barren land will be reclaimed at the rate of five lakh hectares a year.

We need not wait for the commencement of the Eighth Plan to take these projects. A beginning should be made this year itself.

Plastictulture holds vast potential for increasing agricultural productivity. The uses of plastic are many, especially in irrigation, storage and packaging. Existing plastictulture schemes will be substantially expanded.

It is proposed to extend incentives for the installation of sprinkler and drip irrigation systems to all farmers. During the Tenth Five Year Plan, one lakh additional sprinkler systems and one lakh drip irrigation systems will be installed to optimise the use of scarce water resources.

Good seeds are the basic foundation of higher agricultural productivity. The new seed policy is under implementation and the buffer stock being built will ensure that kisans have access to high quality seeds and planting material at reasonable costs.

We are particularly concerned about small, marginal and Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe farmers. By 1990–91, supply of improved seeds will be ensured.

Agricultural research is simply not getting the attention or priority it needs. We are reconstituting the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and I shall take over as its President.

We have two major objectives in mind. First, we propose to generate appropriate technologies for each sub-zone of the 15 agro-climatic zones so that both demand-side and supply-side problems can be addressed.

Second, a special time-bound programme in research and development of hybrids is being taken up to cover rice, maize, jowar, bajra, arhar, cotton and oilseeds.

Results are expected within five years and the implementation of the research programme will be monitored at the highest level.

To promote the manufacture of agricultural machinery and implements of improved design, particularly those using new and more efficient materials, a special fund is being established to extend credit for the manufacture and marketing of such machinery and implements.

For adding value to primary produce of the farmers and for expanding employment opportunities in rural areas, it is necessary to encourage agro-based industries, particularly food processing.