Mr. Vice-Chairman, I was mentioning the need for trained co-operative personnel. On the one side, we have to train the non-officials in co-operative principles and, on the other side, as a permanent skeleton for running all co-operative institutions, we should have training of co-operative personnel.

In this connection, Mr. Vice-Chairman, I would like to appreciate the beginning that has been made in training non-officials in co-operation. This has been attempted on a scale which has not been done hitherto but more than any co-operative principles, the human element, the element of character, the element by which people will stand up to certain co-operative principles rather than their own selfish purposes is what is wanting in many of our co-operative societies. This cannot be improved by legislation. Nobody can legislate a people into good behaviour. This can only be done by constantly training people, telling people the principles we stand for and appreciating the people who attach themselves to these principles.

With regard to the training of co-operative personnel, I do not know about other States but as far as Tamil Nadu is concerned, there are three institutions which give one year training in co-operation, one year’s training for graduates who are considered as senior inspectors and another for school finals and above who are called Junior Inspectors, but a better type of co-operative training institution has arisen which the Ministry of Co-operation should utilise, called the Rural Institutes.

The Rural Institutes today provide a three-year course in co-operation. It is one of the unfortunate things in our country that on the one side, we train people and, on the other side, we do not use trained personnel. We know the number of people we send to foreign countries for training in various types of engineering fields and when they return, we use them just in the wrong places and many of them feel frustrated because they are not utilised in the fields for which they were trained.

Even today, in the case of the Rural Institutes we find that they produce 100 to 150 graduates in co-operation but they are not being utilised. Every one of them can be employed with benefit to the co-operative movement. There are also two institutions, one in Coimbatore and another in Udaipur, where a two-year course is given after a three-year graduate course and this has been declared by the Ministry of Home Affairs as equivalent to a post-graduate degree in co-operation but these boys are not being utilised and the funny thing about it is that when the National Co-operative Union advertised for posts, it asked for M.As. in Agricultural Economics but not for M.As. in Co-operation.

This is all the more surprising because the Education Ministry had received a letter from the National Co-operative Union saying that these post-graduates in co-operation would be utilised by the National Co-operative Union. In spite of all this, no post-graduates in co-operation are being utilised in the advertisement they called for all excepting post-graduate students in co-operation. This only shows the lack of coordination between the Ministry of Co-operation and the Ministry of Education.

I hope, Mr. Vice-Chairman, the Ministry of Co-operation will see that these people who are trained specifically on a request made by representatives of the Co-operation Ministry and the Reserve Bank and who have undergone a two-year course after graduation are properly utilised. Thereafter at least, I hope that people will choose those who have studied co-operation and have undergone a course of training that has been provided by the State at huge expenditure.

Now, I come to the next important aspect of co-operation and that is with regard to financing. Recently, our apex banks have been strengthened. Recently, we also passed legislation here in this House by which amounts up to fifteen hundred crores would be advanced for co-operative marketing. It has not reached the maximum but I hope we are taking steps so that co-operative finance will improve.

Today, if we take statistics, we will find that financing by the co-operative sector has increased many times. I must accept that. If I remember aright, as far as Tamil Nadu is concerned, it has become five, six, seven and even ten times in certain areas and while this is good so far as it goes, greater facilities should be provided for further expansion if the movement is to touch the people. If it is merely to be an example of a society here and there, it is another matter.

But if our policy is, as it has been proclaimed to be, that we want to expand all our activities through the co-operative sector so that the people will have a say and the people will do it in the best possible manner for the good of the people, then the finance that we provide is not very sufficient. As I said before, Mr. Vice-Chairman, the amount invested in the co-operative sector has been increased considerably in recent years.