Sir, a special programme for women and child development was started in 1982 in rural areas. The aim of this programme was to give maximum opportunities to women for self-employment and enhance their reach to social services. Initially, the programme which was implemented in 50 districts of the country has been extended to 250 districts. Every year, this programme is being extended to 50 additional districts and it is estimated that all the districts of the country will be covered under this programme during the Ninth Five Year Plan.

Under this programme, poor women in rural areas are organised and market support income generating activities relating to them are provided. For this purpose, a sum of Rs. 15,000 is given as recurring fund.

The issue of providing water to all the 5.8 lakh villages is a subject matter of top priority for our Government. The hon. Members are well aware of this fact that the primary reason behind the high rate of infant mortality is the use of contaminated water for drinking purposes, for household chores and for other purposes. The National Drinking Water Mission was established in 1986 to accelerate water supply with the help of improved and low cost technologies. Keeping in view the fact that still there are around one lakh villages or settlements which have been partially covered by the facility of clean drinking water supply, there is also the need of the hour to cover these villages entirely. The State Governments have been asked to conduct country-wide survey to make proper assessment. This survey would be completed by July, 2001. On the basis of the results of this survey, the Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission will prepare a time-bound programme to cover all the villages and settlements completely during the Thirteenth Five Year Plan. In the policy of providing drinking water facility, we have laid particular emphasis on making available drinking water in those places in the villages where Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are residing. The State Governments have been given special Central assistance to the tune of Rs. 60 crores for providing clean drinking water to 30 thousand settlements of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes facing scarcity of clean drinking water under the programmes launched to celebrate the centenary year of Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar.

Under the National Drinking Water Mission, the guinea worm problem which is prevalent in only 6 States will now be eliminated by the end of the current year. Similarly, the Central Government has taken several steps to remove the excess quantity of fluoride from drinking water. Alternative sources of clean drinking water and equipment to remove fluoride will be made available to the affected villages. For both the works, a special provision to provide funds to the States is being made. Public awakening campaign is being launched in this regard.

The Government have taken the decision to open laboratories at 500 all the places for the qualitative testing of drinking water. The setting up of 110 such permanent and 26 mobile laboratories has already been accorded sanction. I would also like to point out that the construction amenities provided for the disposal of dirt and dirty water are comparatively very inadequate. This issue will be taken up for discussion at an early date in the National Seminar and the policy will undergo change. I would like to mention that World Bank, UNICEF and many countries of the world are extending their assistance for the implementation of these two programmes.

The programme started to make available drinking water in villages through Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission is the biggest in the world and has become a model for other developing countries.

In order to have systematic agricultural development and to maintain it, an effective system is essential for marketing of agricultural products so that the interests of producers and consumers may be safeguarded. A model Act has been circulated to the States in order to make uniformity in the regulation and management of markets. Till now, out of 7,000 wholesale markets, 6,000 markets have been brought under this regulation. In order to provide basic infra-structure facilities for these markets under a Centrally-sponsored programme, the committees of the trade centres are given an amount of Rs. 4 lakhs to Rs. 20 lakhs per market through the State Government. Under this programme, the total amount given to the State Government from the inception of this programme till now is Rs. 90 crores.

Now, both the programmes for development of markets and construction of village godowns have been completely entrusted to the State Governments. Classification and standardization of agriculture and related matters are very important. In order to ensure classification and gradation services, the Marketing and Inspection Directorate have set up a network of regional offices and sub-offices in the country and many Agmark Laboratories have been set up in many of the States.