The Rural Credit Survey Committee, which looked into the entire question in 2001 had made certain recommendations. In the drafting of our Plans, the recommendations of the Rural Credit Survey Committee were given due weight. You know that in the Ninth Five Year Plan, it was stated that at least 50 per cent of the villages should be brought under co-operatives. According to the Plan, all the villages and all the peasant families are to be brought under co-operatives. This is the perspective with which the Planning Commission has looked at the problem. What prompted them to do that was that in the Rural Credit Survey Committee’s Report, they have said that both through the Government and co-operative sources credits were available to peasants only to the tune of 6 per cent. Through co-operatives alone, it is, I think, 3 per cent or so. The other sources of credit to the peasants are the original money-lenders. They have elaborately described all that. One point which they stressed in their report is that even the co-operatives do not cater to the needs of the weaker sections of the village community. They have stated that in villages where the money-lender, the trader and the village chief function through one person, even the co-operative movement is controlled by them in many places. If they are outside the co-operative movement, they will sabotage it from outside. If they are in control of it, they will sabotage it from within. So, even the 3 per cent credit which had gone to the peasantry in the name of the co-operative movement did not reach them really. So, they made it a point in their report to stress that in future we should see that the credit really goes to the weaker sections of the village community. Now, Sir, after the Report of the Rural Credit Survey Committee, we have been working for the last few years. I do not think that a proper evaluation has yet been made as to how the present-day co-operative societies are working. As far as extending the facilities to a larger section of the rural population is concerned, the co-operative movement has succeeded. My point is whether this emphasis that the Committee had laid on taking special care to see that these facilities reach all the lower sections has been properly worked out.

Another point is that even in the matter of extending the activities of the co-operatives, we have not reached the target which was fixed in any of the Plans. Now, they want to make it universal, but even during the Ninth Five Year Plan or even during the Tenth Five Year Plan, the target that was placed before the country was not reached. It was estimated that Rs. 2,000 crores are needed for agricultural operations every year, of which Rs. 800 crores would be financed from their own earnings. The other Rs. 1200 crores they have to get either through co-operatives or through other agencies and this is needed for their short-term, medium-term and long-term loans. For all this, of course, the Co-operative Department must have made certain plans and they have made certain studies under the leadership of the V.L. Mehta Committee, and they have really made certain concrete and helpful suggestions for improving the working of these co-operatives. But even here, in spite of all the recommendations, in spite of all the studies, things are not working in the proper direction.

Now, apart from these credit facilities, much has been said here about the processing factories like sugar factories, etc., which should go to help the peasants. I fully agree that apart from credit societies, marketing societies, processing societies, all these put together will be of great help to the peasants. But are they really serving the real agriculturists? I have heard some people speaking about the successful functioning of certain co-operative societies. I know one co-operative sugar factory. Among its members, not even one per cent are actual agriculturists. Just like a joint stock company, shares are sold, capital is raised, and they are running a proper factory. My point is that such factories should not be brought within the purview of the co-operative movement. They should be treated as ordinary joint stock companies. I will quote another example in this regard to be followed and that is the weavers’ society. There, they have made it a point that among its members at least 80 per cent should be weavers themselves. They have made that a strict rule. If that is so, if such principles are accepted and adhered to, then these processing societies will be of immense help to the peasants. Otherwise in the name of helping the peasants, some people escape the other obligations that may accrue from running a joint stock company and are taking the benefit. I do not feel it proper to invest money in large-scale enterprises on a co-operative basis.