Mr. Chairman, Sir, I welcome this opportunity which has been provided by this honourable House to discuss this statement which I made the other day before the hon. Members. I welcome this opportunity for two reasons. Firstly, it gives me an opportunity of removing some misgivings which are entertained by the hon. Members. It will also give me at the same time an opportunity to clarify some of the details of this statement which I have made before this House.

Before doing that, I would like to make a few observations, and these are that some of the hon. Members have expressed views that, so far as the matter of food is concerned, it has to be treated as a national problem. I do agree with those hon. Members who have suggested that so far as this problem is concerned, let us have a national outlook and let us not bring politics into it, and let us try to see how we can overcome the difficulties with which we are faced, how we can make food available to our people at a reasonable price and how we can help in the increased production of foodgrains and cereals and other commodities so that we may not have to face this kind of difficulty in the future.

The second thing which I would like to point out is this. I think the time has come when we should be clear in our mind that this is not because of pre-conceived ideas or ideologies that we had placed a certain policy before this House and before the country last year. We thought that the policy of take-over would help us in having an effective control over the surplus so that there may be no scope for speculators on the one hand and there may not be distortion of prices on the other hand, and it may be possible for us to provide the foodgrains which are the essential commodities for the existence of our people at a reasonable price to our people and particularly the vulnerable sections. That was the main objective or idea underlying this policy. So far as procurement is concerned, that was a procedure in order to implement that particular policy. And today when some people say that we have reversed our policy or that we have surrendered our policy regarding foodgrains, I do not agree to such a view.

So far as my friend, Mr. Mishra, is concerned and so far as my friend, Mr. Madhu Limaye, is concerned, they did not expect much good out of the policy which we had initiated last year and they also did not expect any good out of the policy which we have enunciated this year but they have not told us what is the better policy which can serve the objective which we have placed before ourselves.

Now, Sir, I would like to point out one thing. There is no question of surrender and there is no question of reversal in our policy. I can reiterate and emphasise that so far as this Government and our party are concerned, we accept the socialist path as the proper path for the purpose of development and progress in this country. We are very clear about this. We shall pursue this path. Maybe that we may have to change the emphasis from time to time; maybe, we may have to change the direction from time to time. But, we hope that the goal that we have set before ourselves will be achieved in the long run.

Now the question before us is this. Why did the policy which we had placed before the House and was accepted by it was not a success? I can give you a number of reasons for this. One of the main reasons why the policy had failed is this. The very hon. Members who are now criticising us had created such a psychology in the country and on the basis of which, it was not possible for us to obtain foodgrains from the cultivators. I would like my hon. friends to realise one thing. This was the policy placed before the country by us.

Sir, it is not possible for the farmers to earn their livelihood from farming alone as they do not have the facilities to grow crops throughout the year in every area. They remain idle for several months in a year. How can they meet their family expenses when they have no work? In order to generate employment as well as purchasing power, the Government should create jobs of some kind or the other. In this connection, I would like to stress dairy development. If the rural people get facilities like loan to buy good variety of cows and buffaloes and also some help under the Centrally-sponsored scheme, they will be able to produce milk and milk products. Therefore, I urge the Government of India to pay adequate attention to promote dairy in different parts of the country.