Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sir, I rise to support the Demands for Grants relating to the Ministry of Labour being headed by a dynamic leader and young Minister.

In a vast country like ours, where we have a very large population, labour force is a very important ingredient for the development of our nation. This particular human resource has not been utilised to the extent possible. This is indeed regrettable. We should look upon population not only as a liability but in the given circumstances, our population or the manpower should be utilised to the best possible extent by giving suitable training.

I think, the Labour Department and the labourers deserve a great deal of respect because whatever we do in this country, the whole process of national re-construction revolves around the work of the labourers.

In our country, unfortunately, the labour force is not well organised. Only a very small percentage of the labour force, about 10 per cent, is in the organised sector whereas about 90 per cent of the labourers are in the unorganised sector. About 27 crore labourers are in the unorganised sector and only 3 crore labourers are in the organised sector.

For the welfare of a large number of people, various laws are being made. We have been talking about labour legislation for a long time. A lot of legislations have already been made. But we have to seriously consider whether all the legislations have helped the labour class. I am sorry to say that a lot of these laws are just accumulating dust and they have not been really useful in many circumstances. Unless the law is practised in the proper spirit, the workers will not be benefited. This particular aspect has to be taken into account while making legislation. Now, there has to be a great deal of political will and enthusiasm to see that the labour laws are really implemented and benefit the people.

Our dynamic and young Minister has recently said in a meeting in Pune that in this session, a new legislation is going to be presented. It may not be completed in this session but certainly it is going to be introduced and it is for the benefit of the organised sector. A new comprehensive and integrated legislation is going to be introduced by our Government for the sake of guaranteeing minimum wages and for providing pension for people in the unorganised sector.

The condition of the labourers is indeed very bad in our country. Look at any factory or any of the big public undertakings. How much care does the employer take for the benefit of the labourers on whose integrity and hard work, the whole enterprise of that particular industry is flourishing? You will find that very few industrialists really look into the different welfare aspects of the labourers.

Take the example of families and children of the labourers. Do their employers make proper arrangement for their health care and education, leave aside their cultural upliftment or their cultural life? Such efforts are not made even in the organised sector. What happens in the unorganised sector is anybody’s guess. The families of the labourers are not looked after properly and a great deal needs to be done and in this regard voluntary organisations can play some role. A small amount of 3 lakhs of rupees has been provided for the welfare of children and women in the unorganised sector. I would urge upon the hon. Minister that the allocations to the voluntary organisations for the betterment of women and children in the organised as well as unorganised sectors should be increased.

As regards the lockouts, wherever there is a lockout of the industry, the labourers have a great deal of suffering. They do not know what to do. They are just left to their lot. But the employer does not suffer as much. Just look at the employers of different big industries. Their standard of living does not change after locking the industry but the people in the factories are left on the street. I suggest that whenever the question of lockout in a particular industry comes up, the question should be considered whether the labourers will be able to run a particular industry and a lot of consideration should be given to this particular aspect and, if possible, that particular industry should be kept alive.

Migration is a very important problem of labourers and it has got multi-dimensions, i.e., labourers within the country and those who are going outside the country. Lot of labourers are exported outside the country and they are facing lot of problems because of the agencies. I would like to mention here one thing that we have entrusted this work to many of the private agencies. But there is need to consider whether we can have a manpower corporation and assign this work to it. Also, there are problems of inter-State migration of the labourers. There is an Act but it is causing difficulties to the labourers who migrate to other States.