Sir, 80 per cent of this country's population lives in villages and a majority of them are landless labourers and marginal farmers. Out of this 80 per cent, 70 crores of rural population, more than 30 crores are landless labourers. They live below the poverty line. Really speaking, there is no legal provision for their well-being and welfare. The urban labour is no less than 10 crores and the Government has taken many steps and measures for their well-being and upliftment.

Sir, I would like to narrate some of the measures taken by the Government for the welfare of the urban labour. There is an Act governing industrial relations and disputes. There are workers' committees, joint management councils and the National Commission on Labour. The Government has also taken many steps for social security like the Employees' State Insurance Scheme, Employees' Provident Fund, Family Pension, maternity benefits, etc., for industrial and urban labour.

There is also the Central Board of Workers’ Education, the objective of which is to create a well-informed and responsible labour force capable of organising and running trade unions on a sound basis. All these measures are taken for the benefit of the industrial labour, mine labour and dock workers.

But what about the landless labour and the agricultural labour which constitute a formidable portion of the labour force of the country? Do they not contribute anything for the development of this nation? Why are they neglected? It is only because they are not vocal, because there is nobody to speak on their behalf and because there are no trade unions for them.

The trade unions of the urban labour exploit the industry. They get the benefits but they do not fulfil their obligations. With less and less work, they get more and more benefits in cash and in kind whereas there is no provision for the landless labour and the agricultural labour.

Millions of them die without food. The Government should make statutory provisions for security of living wage and suitable working conditions for the agricultural labour. Sir, a majority of this landless labour and agricultural labour is heavily burdened by debt. The money-lenders suck their blood and exploit them. The crushing burden of debt on them should be removed. Special tribunals should be appointed to enquire into this and all debts which are beyond the capacity of the peasants to pay should be liquidated.

Meanwhile, a moratorium should be declared, and steps should be taken to provide cheap credit facilities. Sir, for this, the cooperative movement in various parts of the country has done something good. But that requires to be augmented and increased on a large scale.

Sir, many of these landless labourers and agricultural labourers suffer only because there is no land for them. For their benefit, some State Governments enacted tenancy laws, but they were not implemented. The greatest hardship which they suffer from is that they are landless. The land which was to be given to them by way of surplus has to be obtained by the enactment of tenancy laws. It was not given to them. The vested interests in the rural parts of the country evaded the provisions of the tenancy laws.

Therefore, Sir, fixity of tenure with heritable rights along with a right to build houses and to plant trees should be provided for all tenants throughout the country. Unless this is done, I do not think the condition of the rural labour can be improved.

Not only this, Sir, there is a section of the rural population, so to say, the landlords or the rich peasantry. There should be an income tax on their income. Sir, unless their income is taxed and sealed as it is done in the urban parts, they shall continue to exploit these rural people. So, there should be income tax levied on them and this tax yield should be used for the well-being and welfare of these landless labourers.

Now, Sir, as I previously stated, the cooperative movement is, so to say, a movement which can help these rural labourers. For this purpose, the rate of cooperative farming and collective farming can be stepped up in this country. So far as I know, the system of cooperative farming is prevalent only in Gujarat State. I do not know the position prevailing in the rest of the country.

But, so far as my State is concerned, there are some societies formed on a cooperative basis for the benefit of agricultural labourers and they are mostly composed of landless labourers and they get Government waste land from the Government. Now, this land which is provided by the Government is not fertile. If they develop this land, the vested interests of the society snatch away this land.

The result is that there were some attacks on Harijans and backward classes in different parts of the country. A majority of attacks on Harijans and backward classes are only because of land disputes.